# Guide to BNA App Implementation

This guide will provide a detailed overview of the different facets of the
BNA App implementation.

## BNA App implementation guiding principles
The BNA App implementation is part of a comprehensive approach to analyse key
health barriers, identify and prioritize the most significant health system
bottlenecks, determine their causes and develop realistic actions to address
priority constraints at the sub-national level. To achieve this, Ministries of
Health and other bottleneck analysis users should consider taking up the
following guiding principles to successfully implement the application.

1. Ensure that before implementation (within the Ministry of Health) inclusive
discussions with all stakeholders are undertaken to streamline the process,
i.e. MoH (Program & data managers, ICT, M&E teams), stakeholders (Implementing
  and development partners)
2. For the case of MoH, ensure that there exists a functional DHIS2 instance at
 the national level with required datasets that provide data for at least the
 6 determinants of coverage (Commodities, Human Resource, Geographical Access,
   Initial Utilization, Continuous Utilization and Effective Coverage )
3. Work with MoH teams (M&E, Program and Data Managers) to develop the BNA list
of indicators. Important to ensure that indicators can easily be generated from
 the DHIS2 or other nationally available sources.

For sources such census, and survey reports, plan to create a dataset with the
DHIS2 system to facilitate import.

For systems that are not integrated within the DHIS2 system, data can be
exported in spreadsheets and subsequently imported for purposes of generating
the bottleneck analysis charts.

Lookout for denominator issues and indicators that require complex calculations.
You could opt to use proxies or any other relevant indicator that provide data
for the bottleneck analysis.

4. Once the BNA indicator list has been completed, work with the MoH technical
teams to map indicators to the DHIS2 system data elements / Indicators.
5. Ensure that the DHIS2 instance has been upgraded to at least dhis2 2.28 and
above. The BNA app works well in DHIS2 instances starting with v2.28 - v2.33.
6. Obtain the BNA app installer from [Dhis2 app store](https://play.dhis2.org/appstore/)
 by either downloading directly from the site and installing the app in the
 DHIS2 system or installing from with the DHIS2 app management module
 ( follow the [installation manual](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/bna-app/html/dhis2_bottleneck_analysis_manual_full.html#installing-the-bna-app) to
complete the setup)
7. Use  the [BNA configuration guide](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/bna-app/html/dhis2_bottleneck_analysis_manual_full.html#navigating-the-bna-app) to complete
setup for the BNA charts, sub-level and root-cause analysis. Part of the
configuration includes sharing the BNA charts with national and district users,
setting permissions and protocols for access.
8. To ensure the quality of data generated by the BNA charts, both technical,
program and data managers need to validate the data outputs by comparing with
other DHIS2 tools in the system such as pivot tables, data visualizers and
dataset reports.
9. Plan and conduct BNA app trainings at both national (ToT) and the district
levels.
